Title: COMP2121 - Wk02
Date: 2009-03-20 21:17:59
Tags: comp2121,computing

<span>This week we learnt some of the things that separate assembly language from machine code in the context of <span>AVR</span> (or should I say </span><a href="http://www.atmel.com/dyn/Products/tools_card.asp?tool_id=2725"><span><span>AVR</span> Studio</span></a>).
<h3>Important Note 1: Assembly Language</h3>
<span>In <span>AVR</span> assembly an input line takes the form of one of these, ([foo] = Optional)</span>
<pre>[label:] directive [operands] [Comment]
[label:] instruction [operands] [Comment]
Comment
Empty Line</pre>
where a comment has form,
<pre>; [Text]</pre>
<h3>Important Note 2: Pseudo Instructions</h3>
<span><span>AVR</span> Assembly (using <span>AVR</span> studio) has some additional commands that are not part of the <span>AVR</span> instruction set, but the assembler (that is part of <span>AVR</span> studio) interprets into machine code.</span>

<span>Pseudo instructions are recognised by their preceding '.' (dot character). <span>eg</span>,</span>
<pre><span>.<span>equ</span> <span>CONST</span> = 31</span></pre>
<span>, will upon assembly go through the code and replace <span>CONST</span> with 31.</span>

<span>Here are the <span>AVR</span> assembly Pseudo Instructions.</span>
<table border="0">
<tbody>
<tr>
<th>Directive</th>
<th>Description</th>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>BYTE</td>
<td>Reserve byte to a variable</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td><span><span>CSEG</span></span></td>
<td>Code Segment</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td><span><span>CSEGSIZE</span></span></td>
<td>Program memory size</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>DB</td>
<td>Define constant byte(s)</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>DEF</td>
<td>Define a symbolic name on a register</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>DEVICE</td>
<td>Define which device to assemble for</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td><span><span>DSEG</span></span></td>
<td>Data Segment</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td><span><span>DW</span></span></td>
<td>Define Constant word(s)</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td><span><span>ENDM</span>, <span>ENDMACRO</span></span></td>
<td>End macro</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td><span><span>EQU</span></span></td>
<td>Set a symbol equal to an expression</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td><span><span>ESEG</span></span></td>
<td><span><span>EEPROM</span> Segment</span></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>EXIT</td>
<td>Exit from file</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>INCLUDE</td>
<td>Read source from another file</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>LIST</td>
<td><span>Turn <span>listfile</span> generation on</span></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td><span><span>LISTMAC</span></span></td>
<td>Turn Macro expansion in list file on</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>MACRO</td>
<td>Begin macro</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td><span><span>NOLIST</span></span></td>
<td><span>Turn <span>listfile</span> generation off</span></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>ORG</td>
<td>Set program origin</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>SET</td>
<td>Set a symbol to an expression</td>
</tr>
</tbody></table>
<strong>.byte</strong><span> - Reserve some space (only allowed in <span>dseg</span>). <span>eg</span>.</span>
<pre><span>.<span>dseg</span></span>
  var1: .byte 4 ;reserve 4 bytes and store address in var1

.CSEG
  ldi r30, low(var1) ; Load address into Z low register
  ldi r31, high(var1) ; Load address into Z high register
  ld r1, Z ; Load VAR1 into register 1</pre>
...and some more...
<pre>.def FOO=r30 ;give register 30 the symbolic name FOO
<span>.<span>equ</span> var = 2 ;like C's #define statement</span>
.set var = 2 ;like a global variable in C</pre>
<h3>Important Note 3: Segments</h3>
<span>There <span>AVR</span> three segments of an <span>AVR</span> assembly program. Also when writing an assembly program you need to be able to specify which segment you are referring to, so you need to declare this using an <span>AVR</span> assembler directive shown in brackets below.</span>
<ol>
	<li><span>Code Segment (.<span>cseg</span>)</span></li>
	<li><span>Data Segment (.<span>dseg</span>)</span></li>
	<li><span><span>EEPROM</span> Segment (.<span>eseg</span>)</span></li>
</ol>
"The CSEG directive defines the start of a Code Segment. An Assembler file can consist of several Code Segments, which are concatenated into one Code Segment when assembled. The BYTE directive can not be used within a Code Segment. The default segment type is Code. The Code Segments have their own location counter which is a word counter. The ORG directive can be used to place code and constants at specific locations in the Program memory. The directive does not take any parameters." [1]
<h3>Notes from the Lab</h3>
<strong>Assembly Code and Machine Code</strong>

<span>In the lab we looked at this <span>AVR</span> assembly program,</span>
<pre>.include "m64def.inc"
.def a =r16 ; define a to be register r16
.def b =r17
.def c =r18
.def d =r19
.def e =r20
main: ; main is a label
<span><span>ldi</span> a, 10 ; load 10 into r16</span>
ldi b, -20
<span><span>mov</span> c, a ; copy the value of r16 into r18</span>
add c, b ; add r18 and r17 and store the result in r18
<span><span>mov</span> d, a</span>
sub d, b ; subtract r17 from r19 and store the result in r19
<span><span>lsl</span> c ; refer to <span>AVR</span> Instruction Set for the semantics of</span>
<span><span>asr</span> d ; <span>lsl</span> and <span>asr</span></span>
mov e, c
add e, d
loop:
inc r21 ; increase the value of r21 by 1
<span><span>rjmp</span> loop ; jump to loop</span></pre>
<span>The machine code executable produced by <span>AVR</span> studio was 24 bytes long, the question was why. It's actually quite simple, all of the here instructions are 1 word (2 bytes = 16 bits), there are 12 instruction so total 24 bytes. One thing that initially confused me was the weird encoding. Back in 1917 I got the impression that if you have something like <span>mov</span> r16 r17 that this would be represented in machine code as some number for the <span>mov</span> operation followed by two more numbers of the same bit size for the registers. However this can vary depending on the architecture.</span>

<span>For example the <span>mov</span> operation, <span>MOV</span> Rd, <span>Rr</span> has encoding 0010 11rd <span>dddd</span> <span>rrrr</span>. The instruction takes up 6 bits, the source register takes up 5 bits and the destination takes up 5 bits (total 16 bits). The reason that the source and destination bits are intertwined is that it makes things easier on the hardware implementation to do it this way.</span>

The program above has machine code (in hexadecimal),
<pre><span>E00A EE1C 2F20 0F21 2F30 1B31 0F22 9535 2F42 0F43 5993 <span>CFFE</span></span></pre>
and annotated,
<pre><span>+00000000:   E00A        <span>LDI</span>     R16,0x0A         Load immediate</span>
+00000001:   EE1C        LDI     R17,0xEC         Load immediate
<span>+00000002:   2F20        <span>MOV</span>     R18,R16          Copy register</span>
+00000003:   0F21        ADD     R18,R17          Add without carry
<span>+00000004:   2F30        <span>MOV</span>     R19,R16          Copy register</span>
+00000005:   1B31        SUB     R19,R17          Subtract without carry
<span>+00000006:   0F22        <span>LSL</span>     R18              Logical Shift Left</span>
+00000007:   9535        ASR     R19              Arithmetic shift right
<span>+00000008:   2F42        <span>MOV</span>     R20,R18          Copy register</span>
+00000009:   0F43        ADD     R20,R19          Add without carry
+0000000A:   9553        INC     R21              Increment
<span>+0000000B:   <span>CFFE</span>        <span>RJMP</span>    PC-0x0001        Relative jump</span></pre>
<strong>Status Register
</strong>

Stepping through this program also shows a few of the status registers in use. The Status register, like all the other registers has 8 bits, namely,
<table border="0">
<tbody>
<tr>
<th><span><span>SREG</span></span></th>
<th>Status Register</th>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>C</td>
<td>Carry Flag</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Z</td>
<td>Zero Flag</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>N</td>
<td>Negative Flag</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>V</td>
<td>Two’s complement overflow indicator</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>S</td>
<td>N ⊕ V, For signed tests</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>H</td>
<td>Half Carry Flag</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>T</td>
<td><span>Transfer bit used by <span>BLD</span> and <span>BST</span> instructions</span></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>I</td>
<td>Global Interrupt Enable/Disable Flag</td>
</tr>
</tbody></table>
<span>Last week we saw how signed and unsigned numbers are stored, so if you look at the program above you will see that the last part just increments a register infinitely over and over. Stepping through this shows us what the status register does as we do this. Remember that <span>AVR</span> does all arithmetic in two's compliment.</span>
<table border="0">
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>0</td>
<td>H Z</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>1-127</td>
<td>H</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>128</td>
<td>H V N</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>129-255</td>
<td>H S N</td>
</tr>
</tbody></table>
As you can see the values that are negative under the two's complement 128-255 have the N (negative) flag. Also from 127 then to 128 under two's compliment we have gone from 127 to -128, so the V (Two’s complement overflow indicator) flag is indicated. 0 has the zero flag.
<h3>The Rest</h3>
The lecture notes go over some of the <a href="http://www.cse.unsw.edu.au/~cs2121/AVR/AVR-Instruction-Set.pdf"><span><span>AVR</span> instructions</span></a><span> but I think the docs provided by <span>Atmel</span> are fine. What I do think needs explaining (and me learning) is the carry flag and the difference between operations like add without carry (ADD) and add with carry (ADC).</span>

<span>Here is how I understand the carry bit. Say we have 4 bit registers and try to add (in binary) 1000 and 1000, the answer is 10000 however this is 5 bits and we only have 4 bits available to store the result. An overflow has occurred. To introduce some terminology, the most significant bit (or byte) (<span>msb</span>) is the left most bit (or byte) in big-<span>endian</span> (right most in little-<span>endian</span>), and vice-<span>versa</span> for least significant bit (or byte) (<span>lsb</span>). The carry bit (C flag) is the carry from the <span>msb</span>. This can indicate overflow in some cases but not always, it those cases the V flag (Two’s complement overflow indicator) is set.</span>

<span>So getting back to ADD and ADC, ADD will just add the two numbers ignoring the carry bit and ignoring overflow whereas ADC will actually add the carry bit to the result. At least this is what I've observed, though I'm not 100% sure on this.</span>
<h3><span>References</span></h3>
<span>[1] <a href="www.atmel.com/atmel/acrobat/doc1022.pdf">AVR Assembler User Guide</a>. </span>www.atmel.com/atmel/acrobat/doc1022.pdf
<h3><span>Bibliography</span></h3>
<span><a href="www.atmel.com/atmel/acrobat/doc1022.pdf">AVR Assembler User Guide</a>. </span>www.atmel.com/atmel/acrobat/doc1022.pdf