Title: COMP2121 - Wk04
Date: 2009-04-13 22:18:26
Tags: comp2121,computing

Some general notes from an AVR Tutorial that I have found useful and need to reiterate.
<ul>
	<li>"Only the registers from R16 to R31 load a constant immediately with the LDI command, R0 to R15 don't do that.</li>
	<li>The first register is always the target register where the result is written to!</li>
	<li><span style="text-decoration:line-through;">Assembler directives always start with a dot in column 1 of the text. Instructions do NEVER start in column 1, they are always preceded by a Tab- or blank character!</span> [There are no restrictions with respect to column placement of labels, directives, comments or instructions.]</li>
	<li>A very special extra role is defined for the register pairs R26:R27, R28:R29 and R30:R31. The role is so important that these pairs have extra names in AVR assembler: X, Y and Z. These pairs are 16-bit pointer registers, able to point to addresses with max. 16-bit into SRAM [(part of the data memory)] locations (X, Y or Z) or into locations in program memory (Z).
The lower byte of the 16-bit-address is located in the lower register, the higher byte in the upper register. Both parts have their own names, e.g. the higher byte of Z is named ZH (=R31), the lower Byte is ZL (=R30). These names are defined in the standard header file for the chips. Dividing these 16-bit-pointer names into two different bytes is done like follows:
<pre>.EQU Address = RAMEND ; RAMEND is the highest 16-bit address in SRAM
LDI YH,HIGH(Address) ; Set the MSB
LDI YL,LOW(Address) ; Set the LSB"¹</pre>
</li>
</ul>
<ul>
	<li>Define names for registers with the .DEF directive, never use them with their direct name Rx.</li>
	<li>If you need pointer access reserve R26 to R31 for that purpose.</li>
	<li>16-bit-counter are best located R25:R24.</li>
	<li>If you need to read from the program memory, e.g. fixed tables, reserve Z (R31:R30) and R0 for that purpose.</li>
	<li>If you plan to have access to single bits within certain registers (e.g. for testing flags), use R16 to R23 for that purpose.¹</li>
</ul>
Sections marked with ¹ are ©2002-2009 by <a href="http://www.avr-asm-tutorial.net/">http://www.avr-asm-tutorial.net</a>, from <em>Beginners Introduction to the Assembly Language of ATMEL AVR Microprocessors</em> by Gerhard Schmidt 2003. Used under the supplied license, "You may use, copy and distribute these pages as long as you keep the copyright information with it."