Title: MySchool 2.0... I'm ready for another scraping challenge.
Date: 2011-02-12 16:20:47
Tags: 

A quote from Parliament, (<a href="http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22chamber%2Fhansardr%2F2011-02-10%2F0130%22">gov source</a>) (sorry, not up on OpenAustralia yet):
<blockquote><strong>Ms SMYTH</strong> (La Trobe) (3:15 PM)   —My question is to the Minister for School Education, Early Childhood  and Youth. How will the My School website deliver greater transparency  and information to parents?
<strong>Mr GARRETT</strong> (Kingsford Smith) (Minister for School Education, Early Childhood and  Youth)   —I thank the member for her question. The fact is that My School has  transformed community understanding of school performance, providing the  community and parents with information about important areas of  schooling, including literacy and numeracy—information that was never  before available other than for education bureaucrats and officials.  With some 4.6 million visits to the My School site since its launch, it  is clearly a matter of great interest to all Australians.

Now My School 2.0 will take transparency to a new level, with  significant new features. Importantly, financial data on each school  will be reported for the first time to everyone to provide a clear  picture of the resources that are provided to schools to support the  education of students. The collection of this financial data is a  complex task and to ensure that it is robust information and comparable,  the Australian Curriculum Assessment and Reporting  Authority—ACARA—commissioned a detailed validation process undertaken by  leading accounting firm, Deloitte. Later in November Deloitte  identified an anomaly in the information collected, which could lead to a  misstatement of recurrent income for independent schools. Deloitte  recommended to ACARA that further validation and consultation take  place.

On 2 December I announced that My School 2.0 would only be launched  after this further validation, and consultation with independent  schools, had been undertaken. I also wrote to the ACARA chair requesting  a detailed timetable on how outstanding school data issues would be  resolved. I can inform the House that over summer ACARA has liaised  extensively with individual schools and consulted with the Independent  Schools Council and relevant state and territory associations of  independent schools because I wanted to make sure that impacted schools  had been contacted by ACARA and that they had had time to check their  data and understand how the data will be used and reported.

I can advise that every independent school in the country has been  contacted by ACARA by email. Follow-up contact by telephone has been  made when requested and as required and over 900 independent schools now  have school finance data reports that have been quality assured by  ACARA, Deloitte and my department. These schools are now being given the  opportunity to review what their My School finance page will look like  because My School 2.0 will also include an enhanced ICSEA—Index of  Community Socio-Educational Advantage—where the methodology has been  improved to provide a more accurate direct measure based on parent  education and occupation. It is a case of making good data even better.

The change to ICSEA methodology has led to some changes in ICSEA  values and less than four per cent of all schools did request a review  of their ICSEA value. These schools were given the opportunity to  provide more relevant data or information on changed school context. Now  schools and systems have had nearly three months to provide the  additional data in support of their review request. Information has been  considered by the ICSEA expert panel to be satisfied that each school’s  value is robust based on the most accurate data available.

So today, I am pleased to advise that the further work I asked ACARA  to do in relation to school data has almost been completed and that My  School 2.0 will be ready for release on 4 March. With My School 2.0  ready for release on 4 March the government will deliver an important  and fundamental reform—one acknowledged by the Leader of the Opposition  as worthy of the name ‘reform’. Importantly, it is a reform that  empowers parents to influence the quality of their child’s schooling and  empowers education ministers, for the first time, with a national  dataset to target school improvement. Importantly, it is a reform that  underpins this government’s substantial reforms in the area of  education. We want to provide every school in Australia with the  possibilities of a great education.</blockquote>
So, come March 4, I look forward to writing another scraper to get this data in a usable exchange format, and out of the unusable HTML mess.

p.s. data dumps and scraping code for the existing site are currently up at <a href="https://github.com/andrewharvey/myschool">https://github.com/andrewharvey/myschool</a>.